DOCS-1587 - Mobot UCI (Extended Preview) (#6629)
SumoLogic/sumologic-documentation: docs/search/mobot-preview.md

### Clarification prompts

Mobot interprets natural language questions even when they are incomplete or ambiguous. If your question is unclear, Mobot asks a targeted follow-up question to narrow intent before running a search.

For example, asking `Show me logs from last 15 minutes` or `Show me all logs from the last 24 hours` without specifying a source prompts Mobot to ask which application, service, or log source you are interested in, with inline examples such as `kubernetes`, `nginx`, or `auth_logs`.

<img src={useBaseUrl('img/search/mobot/clarification-prompt-mobotv2.png')} alt="Mobot clarification prompt" style={{border: '1px solid gray'}} width="600" />

<img src={useBaseUrl('img/search/mobot/clarification-prompt-logs-mobotv2.png')} alt="Mobot clarification prompt" style={{border: '1px solid gray'}} width="600" />

Respond with a source name, source category expression, or any keyword related to what you are looking for. If your question falls outside available data or system capabilities, Mobot clarifies or redirects rather than returning an error.

### Unstructured logs support

> Previously, Mobot worked best on structured (JSON) logs. With this preview release, Mobot automatically applies parsing logic to unstructured logs, even if no FERs are configured.

Author: ```suggestion
Previously, Mobot worked best on structured (JSON) logs. With this preview release, Mobot can apply parsing logic to unstructured logs, even if no FERs are configured.
```

:::

This preview introduces a new iteration of [Sumo Logic Mobot](/docs/search/mobot/) that functions as a conversational intelligence layer between you and your data. It understands intent from open-ended questions, plans and executes multi-step analysis behind the scenes, and delivers structured, narrative-driven answers with suggested next steps. Because Mobot carries context across turns, follow-up questions, refinements, and changes in direction feel part of the same flow.

Your feedback directly shapes the product. See [Feedback](#feedback) below.

## What's new

Features and behavior described here are subject to change before general availability.

| | Before | Now |
|:--|:--|:--|
| **[Interface and routing](#unified-interface-and-intent-understanding)** | Separate Query Agent and Knowledge Agent with manual selection | Agent automatically uses available capabilities behind the scenes |
| **[Reasoning & Complex Log Analysis](#reasoning--complex-log-analysis)** | Natural language to log query translation | Higher-order reasoning, planning, and implicit log analysis |

> | **[Results rendering](#results-rendering)** | Query results open in Log Search | Query results render as structured narratives, basic visualization like table summaries, plus option to open in Log Search |

Author: ```suggestion
| **[Results rendering](#results-rendering)** | Query results open in Log Search | Query results render as narrative summaries with structured tables inline in the conversation, plus an option to open in Log Search |
```

| **[Conversation history](#conversation-history)** | 24 hours | Retained indefinitely (subject to change) |

### Unified Interface and Intent Understanding

You no longer need to choose between Query Agent and Knowledge Agent. Mobot handles this for you.

Open Mobot by clicking **Mobot** in the left nav. Then type your question in the **Ask Something** field.

<img src={useBaseUrl('img/search/mobot/ask-something-mobotv2.png')} alt="Mobot interface showing unified prompt input" style={{border: '1px solid gray'}} width="600" />

Try asking:

* A log analysis question about errors, trends, anomalies, or security events (for example, `Show me logs from last 15 minutes`).
* A platform how-to question about configuration, setup, or best practices (for example, `How do I set up an OTel Collector?`).

Mobot automatically routes your question to the appropriate skill, as seen here:

<img src={useBaseUrl('img/search/mobot/platform-how-to-mobotv2.png')} alt="Mobot platform how-to answer" style={{border: '1px solid gray'}} width="700" />

### Reasoning & complex log analysis

> While Mobot processes your question, it displays a **Thinking...** or **Planning...** indicator showing that it is identifying relevant data sources and analyzing the problem. Behind the scenes, Mobot selects relevant data sources, schema, lookup tables, and saved queries, infers time ranges based on context, and retrieves log data enriched with environmental context.

Reviewer: can we remove the following:
1. enriched with environmental context
2. schema and lookup tables

> While Mobot processes your question, it displays a **Thinking...** or **Planning...** indicator showing that it is identifying relevant data sources and analyzing the problem. Behind the scenes, Mobot selects relevant data sources, schema, lookup tables, and saved queries, infers time ranges based on context, and retrieves log data enriched with environmental context.

Author: ```suggestion
While Mobot processes your question, it displays a **Thinking...** or **Planning...** indicator showing that it is identifying relevant data sources and analyzing the problem. Behind the scenes, Mobot selects relevant data sources and saved queries, infers time ranges based on context, and retrieves log data.
```

Respond with a source name, source category expression, or any keyword related to what you are looking for. If your question falls outside available data or system capabilities, Mobot clarifies or redirects rather than returning an error.

### Unstructured logs support

Previously, Mobot worked best on structured (JSON) logs. With this preview release, Mobot automatically applies parsing logic to unstructured logs, even if no FERs are configured.

Now it has built-in support for unstructured logs (raw, text-based log data that does not follow a structured format like JSON). You can ask questions in plain English and get meaningful results from nearly any log data, without requiring Field Extraction Rules (FERs).

At this stage, Mobot prioritizes unstructured logs that are already used in dashboards, allowing it to surface insights from high-value log sources out-of-the-box. This means it will not interpret all raw logs yet, but support is actively being expanded beyond dashboards.

* **Broader coverage**. Mobot parses and generates insights from unstructured log formats, even without FERs, making it useful for environments that include custom or inconsistent log types.

> * **Improved usability**. Ask questions in natural language. Mobot interprets your intent and suggests relevant searches, even for raw, non-JSON logs.

Author: ```suggestion
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>How long is conversation history retained?</summary>

Mobot currently retains conversation history indefinitely. Retention limits are being evaluated and may change before General Availability.
</details>

<details>
<summary>Will Mobot interpret all my unstructured logs?</summary>

Mobot prioritizes unstructured logs that are already used in dashboards. This improves the relevance of insights and helps focus on high-value data sources.
</details>

<details>
<summary>How is unstructured log support different from structured log support?</summary>

Structured logs have predefined fields, allowing Mobot to map queries directly. For unstructured logs, Mobot uses AI and parsing techniques to infer structure on the fly.
</details>

<details>
<summary>Will Mobot support additional capabilities over time?</summary>

> Yes. Mobot is designed to be extensible. Over time, more skills can be added as teams across the platform contribute new capabilities. The current preview focuses on log analysis and platform how-to guidance, with additional skills planned for future releases.

Author: ```suggestion
Yes. Mobot is designed to be extensible. Over time, more capabilities can be added as teams across the platform contribute new features. The current preview focuses on log analysis and platform how-to guidance, with additional capabilities planned for future releases.
```

> Yes. Mobot is designed to be extensible. Over time, more skills can be added as teams across the platform contribute new capabilities. The current preview focuses on log analysis and platform how-to guidance, with additional skills planned for future releases.

Reviewer: can we remove the word 'skills', and replace it with capabilities or something similar.

Your feedback directly shapes the product. See [Feedback](#feedback) below.

## What's new

Features and behavior described here are subject to change before general availability.

| | Before | Now |
|:--|:--|:--|
| **[Interface and routing](#unified-interface-and-intent-understanding)** | Separate Query Agent and Knowledge Agent with manual selection | Agent automatically uses available capabilities behind the scenes |
| **[Reasoning & Complex Log Analysis](#reasoning--complex-log-analysis)** | Natural language to log query translation | Higher-order reasoning, planning, and implicit log analysis |
| **[Results rendering](#results-rendering)** | Query results open in Log Search | Query results render as narrative summaries with structured tables inline in the conversation, plus an option to open in Log Search |
| **[Log support](#unstructured-logs-support)** | Structured and semi-structured logs | Structured, semi-structured, and [unstructured logs](#unstructured-logs-support) |

> | **[Conversation history](#conversation-history)** | 24 hours | Retained indefinitely (subject to change) |

Reviewer 2: retention has no change @kimsauce

</details>

<details>
<summary>Can Mobot detect what sources or integrations I do not have set up?</summary>

Mobot can detect missing sources or partitions reactively. When you ask a question that requires a specific data source, Mobot attempts the query and detects if the partition or data does not exist, then provides setup guidance. Mobot cannot proactively scan your environment and generate a list of all unconfigured integrations.
</details>

<details>
<summary>Is Mobot an investigation or SRE agent?</summary>

No. Mobot is built to go wide, not deep. It is a unified conversational interface for interacting with your data across log analysis and platform guidance, with automated routing and multi-step reasoning. Specialist tools built for SOC or SRE workflows are built to go deep, with purpose-built playbooks, triage steps, and integrations tailored to those roles. Mobot's goal is to let you talk to your data, explore and refine answers conversationally, and surface insights without requiring you to know which query to write or which agent to invoke.

> </details>

Author: ```suggestion
```

---
id: mobot-preview
title: Sumo Logic Mobot (Private Preview)
description: Mobot is Sumo Logic's next-generation AI assistant that unifies log analysis and platform guidance in a single conversational interface with automated routing and higher-order reasoning.
keywords:
  - mobot
  - ai assistant
  - artificial intelligence
  - log analysis
  - unstructured logs
---

import useBaseUrl from '@docusaurus/useBaseUrl';

<head>
  <meta name="robots" content="noindex" />
</head>

<p><a href={useBaseUrl('docs/preview')}><span className="preview-private">Private Preview</span></a></p>

:::info Participation requirement

> Access requires a signed AI addendum. This applies to all future stages (extended preview, public preview, and GA) because Mobot processes raw log data. Contact your account team if you have not yet signed the addendum.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Access requires a signed AI addendum. This applies to all future stages (public preview and GA) because Mobot processes raw log data. Contact your account team if you have not yet signed the addendum.
```

:::

This preview introduces a new iteration of [Sumo Logic Mobot](/docs/search/mobot/) that functions as a conversational intelligence layer between you and your data. It understands intent from open-ended questions, plans and executes multi-step analysis behind the scenes, and delivers structured, narrative-driven answers with suggested next steps. Because Mobot carries context across turns, follow-up questions, refinements, and changes in direction feel part of the same flow.

Your feedback directly shapes the product. See [Feedback](#feedback) below.

## What's new

Features and behavior described here are subject to change before general availability.

| | Before | Now |
|:--|:--|:--|
| **Interface** | Separate Query Agent and Knowledge Agent selection | Unified interface with no manual agent selection required |
| **Routing** | Manual | Automatic routing to the right skill based on your question |
| **Reasoning** | Natural language to log query translation | Higher-order reasoning, planning, and implicit log analysis |
| **Results rendering** | Query results open in Log Search | Results render as structured tables inline in the conversation |

> | **Anomaly surfacing** | Not available | Notable findings callout flags patterns and suggests next steps |

Reviewer 3: I had trouble figuring out what this sentence means: "Notable findings callout flags patterns and suggests next steps".  Can you rephrase?

<img src={useBaseUrl('img/search/mobot/inline-results-mobotv2.png')} alt="Mobot inline results with thinking state" style={{border: '1px solid gray'}} width="700" />

### Multi-step analysis

Mobot orchestrates multi-step analysis automatically. It translates your question into the appropriate analytical steps, applies multi-step reasoning to synthesize findings, and presents results as a structured response with suggested next steps.

### Notable findings

After returning results, Mobot summarizes anything that stands out at the bottom of the response, labeled **Notable**. For example, if `WARN` entries share an unusual pattern, Mobot flags them, explains what they may indicate, and asks whether you want to investigate further.

### Configuration gap detection

When you request data from a source that has not been configured, Mobot detects the missing partition or index and provides step-by-step setup guidance rather than returning an empty result.

> For example, asking `Show me Cloud SIEM network records grouped by action` when Cloud SIEM is not enabled prompts Mobot to explain what is missing and walk you through how to enable it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, asking `Show me Cloud SIEM network records grouped by action` when Cloud SIEM is not enabled prompts Mobot to explain what is missing and walks you through how to enable it.
```

* **Security insights**. Detect anomalies or signs of failed logins by querying raw logs already powering security dashboards.
* **Smarter prioritization**. Mobot focuses on unstructured logs that are visualized in dashboards, helping you get meaningful insights from high-value data sources.

## Example prompts

Mobot works best when you start with a business question, not a query. Ask questions the way you naturally think about a problem, then refine through conversation. Here are some tips:
- Start broad, then refine with follow-up questions.
- Do not worry about structure. Mobot will guide you.
- If Mobot needs more context, provide a hint such as a data source, lookup table, or field name.

### Developer and SRE

* `What does the error trend look like for my service over the past 24 hours?`

* `Are any services consistently breaching indexing latency SLOs?`

Follow-up:

* `Which instances are most impacted?`

* `When did this start?`

### Security analyst

* `Have there been any recent phishing attempts?`

* `Are there any unusual authentication patterns in our environment?`

Follow-up:

* `Which users are involved?`

* `Is this activity increasing over time?`

> ## Limitations

Reviewer 4: Do we typically include limitations in our docs?

Author: @margaret-selid yes, we do. But they're usually very short, about 1-3 bullets.

Author: @margaret-selid how about condensing the limitations to something like this?

```
Mobot is in Extended Preview and has the following known limitations.

**Use cases**
- Log analysis only. Metrics, traces, and other telemetry types are not supported.
- Capabilities are constrained by available skills. Domain intelligence and planning are still evolving.

**Access and actions**
- Read-only. Mobot can query and analyze data but cannot modify, delete, ingest data, manage dashboards or monitors, or access external systems.

**Data and query constraints**
- Only works with data that has been ingested and is still within your retention period.
- Large time ranges (30 or more days) or deeply nested queries may be slow, time out, or hit platform limits.

**Experience**
- Performance and latency may vary depending on query complexity.
- Responses may not always be fully accurate or complete.
- No memory across sessions. Each conversation starts fresh.
```

Reviewer 4: i think this is good! my marketing brain has me questioning mentioning any "limitations" externally, but i think these are framed well and useful for the user.

Author: Thank you for reviewing - will implement! I def understand that from a marketing/PR POV!

Mobot is in Extended Preview and has the following known limitations.

**Use cases**
- Currently limited to log analysis.
- No support for metrics, traces, or other telemetry types.
- Capabilities are constrained by available skills. Domain intelligence and planning capabilities are still evolving.

**Access and actions**
- Read-only. Mobot can query and analyze data but cannot modify, delete, or ingest data.
- Cannot create or manage dashboards, monitors, or scheduled searches.
- No access to external systems such as CRM, databases, APIs, or third-party tools.

**Data and query constraints**
- Only works with data that has been ingested and is still within your retention period.
- Large time ranges (30 or more days) may be slow or time out.
- Very complex or deeply nested queries may hit platform limits.

**Experience**
- Performance and latency may vary depending on query complexity.
- Responses may not always be fully accurate or complete.
- Ambiguous questions may require clarification before Mobot can proceed.
- No memory across sessions. Each conversation starts fresh.

> - Legal, safety, and content guardrails are in progress and will continue to be strengthened.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> - Legal, safety, and content guardrails are in progress and will continue to be strengthened.

Reviewer 4: I would leave this line out--makes it sound like we might not be secure

## FAQ

<details>
<summary>What's new in this preview release?</summary>

This release replaces the manual Query Agent and Knowledge Agent selection with a unified interface and automated routing. It adds higher-order reasoning, multi-step analysis, support for unstructured logs, and extended conversation history.
</details>

<details>
<summary>Do I need to select an agent? What happened to Query Agent and Knowledge Agent?</summary>

No. The underlying capabilities are still there, but you no longer select them manually. Mobot automatically routes data questions to log analysis and how-to questions to platform guidance based on what you ask.
</details>

<details>
<summary>Can Mobot detect what sources or integrations I do not have set up?</summary>

Mobot can detect missing sources or partitions reactively. When you ask a question that requires a specific data source, Mobot attempts the query and detects if the partition or data does not exist, then provides setup guidance. Mobot cannot proactively scan your environment and generate a list of all unconfigured integrations.
</details>

<details>

> <summary>Is Mobot an investigation or SRE agent?</summary>

Reviewer 4: I would not include this Q/A in the docs

:::

This preview introduces a new iteration of [Sumo Logic Mobot](/docs/search/mobot/) that functions as a conversational intelligence layer between you and your data. It understands intent from open-ended questions, plans and executes multi-step analysis behind the scenes, and delivers structured, narrative-driven answers with suggested next steps. Because Mobot carries context across turns, follow-up questions, refinements, and changes in direction feel part of the same flow.

Your feedback directly shapes the product. See [Feedback](#feedback) below.

## What's new

Features and behavior described here are subject to change before general availability.

| | Before | Now |
|:--|:--|:--|
| **[Interface and routing](#united-interface)** | Separate Query Agent and Knowledge Agent with manual selection | Unified interface with automatic routing to the right skill |
| **[Reasoning](#thinking-and-planning)** | Natural language to log query translation | Higher-order reasoning, planning, and implicit log analysis |

> | **[Results rendering](#results-rendering)** | Query results open in Log Search | Query results render as structured table summaries inline in the conversation, plus option to open in Log Search |

Reviewer: focus on 'narratives'?, including table summaries

Respond with a source name, source category expression, or any keyword related to what you are looking for. If your question falls outside available data or system capabilities, Mobot clarifies or redirects rather than returning an error.

### Configuration gap detection

When you request data from a source that has not been configured, Mobot detects the missing partition or index and provides step-by-step setup guidance rather than returning an empty result.

For example, asking `Show me Cloud SIEM network records grouped by action` when Cloud SIEM is not enabled prompts Mobot to explain what is missing and walks you through how to enable it.

This detection works reactively. When you ask a question that requires a specific data source, Mobot attempts the query and detects if the partition or data does not exist. Mobot cannot proactively scan your environment or generate a list of all unconfigured integrations.

You can also use this capability on demand. For example:

* `Do I have AWS CloudTrail data?`
* `Is Kubernetes data flowing in?`
* `Do I have any threat intel lookups set up?`

### Unstructured logs support

> Previously, Mobot worked best on structured (JSON) logs. With this preview release, Mobot automatically applies parsing logic to unstructured logs, even if no FERs are configured.

Reviewer: change automatically apply -> can apply

Now it has built-in support for unstructured logs (raw, text-based log data that does not follow a structured format like JSON). You can ask questions in plain English and get meaningful results from nearly any log data, without requiring Field Extraction Rules (FERs).

At this stage, Mobot prioritizes unstructured logs that are already used in dashboards, allowing it to surface insights from high-value log sources out-of-the-box. This means it will not interpret all raw logs yet, but support is actively being expanded beyond dashboards.

* **Broader coverage**. Mobot parses and generates insights from unstructured log formats, even without FERs, making it useful for environments that include custom or inconsistent log types.

> * **Improved usability**. Ask questions in natural language. Mobot interprets your intent and suggests relevant searches, even for raw, non-JSON logs.

Reviewer: Mobot interprets your intent and suggests relevant searches, even for raw, non-JSON logs. - remove

* `Have there been any recent phishing attempts?`

* `Are there any unusual authentication patterns in our environment?`

Follow-up:

* `Which users are involved?`

* `Is this activity increasing over time?`

### Product and research

* `What integrations does Sumo Logic support for cloud security?`

## Limitations

Mobot is in Extended Preview and has the following known limitations.

**Use cases**
* Log analysis only. Metrics, traces, and other telemetry types are not supported.
* Capabilities are constrained by available skills. Domain intelligence and planning are still evolving.

**Access and actions**
* Read-only. Mobot can query and analyze data but cannot modify, delete, ingest data, manage dashboards or monitors, or access external systems.

**Data and query constraints**
* Only works with data that has been ingested and is still within your retention period.
* Large time ranges (30 or more days) or deeply nested queries may be slow, time out, or hit platform limits.

**Experience**
* Performance and latency may vary depending on query complexity.
* Responses may not always be fully accurate or complete.
* No memory across sessions. Each conversation starts fresh.

> ## FAQ

Reviewer 5: @kimsauce Can you look into the check this FAQ format again if you are creating this section for AI citation.

Author: fixed

* `Is this activity increasing over time?`

### Product and research

* `What integrations does Sumo Logic support for cloud security?`

## Limitations

Mobot is in Extended Preview and has the following known limitations.

**Use cases**
- Currently limited to log analysis.
- No support for metrics, traces, or other telemetry types.
- Capabilities are constrained by available skills. Domain intelligence and planning capabilities are still evolving.

**Access and actions**
- Read-only. Mobot can query and analyze data but cannot modify, delete, or ingest data.
- Cannot create or manage dashboards, monitors, or scheduled searches.
- No access to external systems such as CRM, databases, APIs, or third-party tools.

**Data and query constraints**
- Only works with data that has been ingested and is still within your retention period.
- Large time ranges (30 or more days) may be slow or time out.
- Very complex or deeply nested queries may hit platform limits.

**Experience**
- Performance and latency may vary depending on query complexity.
- Responses may not always be fully accurate or complete.
- Ambiguous questions may require clarification before Mobot can proceed.

> - No memory across sessions. Each conversation starts fresh.

Author: ```suggestion
Mobot is in Extended Preview and has the following known limitations.

**Use cases**
* Log analysis only. Metrics, traces, and other telemetry types are not supported.
* Capabilities are constrained by available skills. Domain intelligence and planning are still evolving.

**Access and actions**
* Read-only. Mobot can query and analyze data but cannot modify, delete, ingest data, manage dashboards or monitors, or access external systems.

**Data and query constraints**
* Only works with data that has been ingested and is still within your retention period.
* Large time ranges (30 or more days) or deeply nested queries may be slow, time out, or hit platform limits.

**Experience**
* Performance and latency may vary depending on query complexity.
* Responses may not always be fully accurate or complete.
* No memory across sessions. Each conversation starts fresh.
```
